# Day 54

Tags: PWA, Performance best practices
Date: September 7, 2023
Status: Done

Task of the day 

- Progressive Web Apps (PWAs)
- Frontend performance best practices

---

### ****What is a PWA? Progressive Web Apps for Beginners****

### What is a progressive web app?

Progressive web applications (PWAs) are apps built with web technologies that we probably all know and love, like HTML, CSS, and Javascript. But they have the feel and functionality of an actual native app.

A native app is a software application built in a specific programming language for a specific device platform, either IOS or Android. PWAs are built with the capabilities like push notifications and the ability to work offline. They are also built on and enhanced with modern APIs which make it easy to deliver improved capabilities along with reliability and the ability to install them on any device. 

PWAs take advantage of the huge web ecosystem, including plugins, community, and the relative ease of deploying and maintaining a website, compared to a native application, which is difficult to develop.

### Characteristics of PWAs

**Responsiveness**

Different companies produce gadgets with different screen sizes, and as a developer it’s your responsibility to ensure all the different users enjoy the product regardless the device they are using. So it’s a good idea to make sure your app can be used on any screen size and its content is available at any view-port size.

**Installable** 

Research has shown that users tend to engage more with installed apps compared to visiting the official sites. Having a PWA as your product gives the users the look, feel and engagement of a normal app.

**Independent Connectivity** 

By keeping a user engaged to your app even while they are offline, provides a more consistent experience than dropping the, back to a default offline page.

A good example to illustrate this will be that of a music app, your users should be able to access offline playback and listen to saved music even without internet connection. Another good example is twitter app, a user is able to go back a read through tweets which they might have missed. 

### **Discoverability**

Since most PWAs are converted websites, it is fair to make them discoverable on the search engines, this will help generate extra traffic to your app. This also acts as an advantage over native apps which can't be discovered over the search engines.

### **Cross Platform**

PWAs are developed as web app first, which means that they need to work on all browsers/systems and not just a selected few. Users should be able to use them in any browser before they decide to install them.

So folks! there you have it, the general info about PWAs. Along the way you might have noticed occasionally a comparison between PWAs and Native App and this might have confused you a bit, Well let's clear the airwaves by checking the comparison between the two to get a clear understanding.

### Benefits of PWAs

A lot of organizations both private and public are switching to PWAs not only because they are cheap to develop but also because they offer greater engagement.

Now let’s look at a quick summary of the benefits of a PWA:

- They are responsive and work with many different screen sizes.
- They can run on multiple platforms and any device with a modern web browser.
- They function just like normal Native Apps.
- The updates are independent, you don't need to visit the play store for an update.
- They're built with common web technologies.
- They're fast and lightweight.
- They work offline unlike other sites.
- They are discoverable via search engine.
- They are easily installable.
- Low maintenance cost

### Required to get started with PWA development

It does not take much to get started building a PWA. You just need a few things and you are good to go.

**Tools**

The best known technology stack to develop PWAs is Angular JS. Speaking of Angular, [here](https://allfront.io/blog/how-to-take-your-angular-apps-offline/) is a resourceful guide on how you can convert your already existing Angular app into PWA. Others stacks include ReactJS and Polymer.

**HTTPS**

You will need a server with a HTTPS connection. This makes sure your user's data is secure. It adds an extra layer of security to you site.

**Application Shell**

It provides a good first impression when your app loads. In simpler words this is what the user sees when they interact with your app for the first time.

**Service workers**

This is one of the key technologies behind PWAs. They help support your app work offline, and they perform advanced caching and run background tasks. Service workers can complete tasks even when your PWA is not running.Some other functions associated with Service Worker include:

- Sending push notification
- Badging icons
- Running background fetch tasks etc...

**Manifest file**

This is a JSON file that is created with a

[Web App Manifest Generator](https://app-manifest.firebaseapp.com/)

. This file contains the information that tells how your PWA should appear and function. It allows you to determine the name, description, icon, colors and other features of your PWA. Here's an example of a manifest file:

```jsx
{
"short_name": "DevBlogger",  
"name": "DevBlogger",  
"description": "All dev stories under one roof",
"theme_color": "#eb5252",  
"background_color": "#000000",  
"display": "fullscreen",  
"Scope": "/",  "orientation": "portrait",  
"icons": [    
    {
        "src": "images/android/android-launchericon-48-48.png",      
        "type": "image/png",      
        "sizes": "48x48"
    },
    {      
        "src": "images/android/android-launchericon-96-96.png",
        "type": "image/png",      
        "sizes": "96x96"    
    },    
    {      
        "src": "images/android/android-launchericon-192-192.png",
        "type": "image/png",      
        "sizes": "192x192"    
    }  
   ],  
       "start_url": "index.html?utm_source=homescreen"
  }
```

**Audit your App:** This is possible using the Google Lighthouse tool. Google Lighthouse is a open-source software that anyone can use on any webpage. Google is a big champion of PWAs and pushes them as the future of the web. You can use Lighthouse to help you see how fast, accessible, and SEO readiness your PWA is.

### How to build a PWA

**Step 1: Plan your app**

Before diving into development, you should consider the goals of your PWA, what features you want to include, priorities and user experience. You can create first design concepts and wireframes for the app to visualize the structure and layout.

In most scenarios, this is often referred to as a ‘ [discovery phase](https://allfront.io/blog/project-discovery-phase-guide/)’. You get the opportunity to ideate and gather user and stakeholder feedback as well as considering the functionalities of your to be product.

**Step 2 - Designing the User interface**

After getting everything right from planning, you can now proceed to designing the UI of your app. During this stage consider things like responsiveness, compatibility with different platforms etc.. Be sure to capture all details that are crucial to the user including their interaction and engagement during usage.

**Step 3 - Developing the Front-end**

Using the web technologies that is HTML, CSS, JavaScript and frameworks like Angular. React or Vue.js develop a visually appealing interface for the users. And always remember they key principle in development using this stack implement a mobile first approach while ensuring responsiveness for larger screens too.

**Step 4 - implementing service workers**

As mentioned previously, service workers are a key component of PWAs. They are JavaScript files that run in the background, enabling offline functionality, push notifications, and caching. To make sure your PWA works to its fullest potential, you’ll need to register and implement a service worker. The way on how you can do this massively depends on which framework you are using.

**Step 5 - Adding push notifications**

Leverage the Push API and service workers to implement push notifications. Obtain the necessary user consent and use a push notification service to send notifications to users.

**Step 6 - Optimizing performance**

Optimization is a very important step in development in general. This is how you provide a seamless experience to your users. by ensuring you reduce loading times. by leveraging techniques such as code splitting and caching we should be able to achieve a fast and efficient operation for our PWA.

**Step 7 - Testing and debugging**

Test your PWA on different devices, browsers and network condition to be sure that it meets the objective. Also be sure to gather user feedback and make necessary improvements when necessary.

**Resources to get started with PWA development** 

- [Google Developers - Progressive Web Apps](https://developers.google.com/web/progressive-web-apps)
- [MDN Web Docs - Progressive Web Apps](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps)
- [freeCodeCamp - Frontend Technologies](https://www.freecodecamp.org/learn/front-end-development-libraries/)
- [Learn PWA](https://web.dev/learn/pwa/)

**Documentation and Reference Materials**

- [Service Workers API Documentation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Service_Worker_API)
- [Progressive Web Apps (PWAs)](https://learn.microsoft.com/microsoft-edge/progressive-web-apps-chromium/?WT.mc_id=%3Fwt.mc_id%3Dstudentamb_223976)

**PWA Development Tools**

- [Workbox - Offline Caching and Service Worker Library](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/workbox)
- [PWA Builder - PWA Generation Platform](https://www.pwabuilder.com/)

**Conclusion**

Keeping in mind that PWAs are new to the industry and haven't yet been fully utilized, they can be a great addition to add to your toolkit.

With the latest technologies and the right tools getting started with PWAs can ultimately increase sales and monetary gain for your product either as an individual or organization. With it's many features including they are fast, able to work offline, and also they perform like normal native apps. This offers your users a great experience and keeps them satisfied.

---

## [Frontend performance best practices](https://roadmap.sh/best-practices/frontend-performance)

### **High priority**

- Minimize number of iframes
- Minified CSS - Remove comments, whitespaces, etc
- CSS files non-blocking
- Inline the critical CSS (above the fold CSS)
- Avoid the embedded / inline CSS
- Analyse stylesheets complexity
- Compress your images format appropriately
- Minify your JavaScript
- Non blocking JavaScript user async / defer
- Use HTTPs on your website
- Keep your page weight < 1500 KB (ideally < 500kb)
- Keep your page load time < 3 seconds
- Keep the time to first byte < 1.3 seconds
- Minimize HTTP Requests
- Serve files from the same protocol
- Avoid requesting unreachable files (404)
- Set HTTP cache headers properly
- GZIP / Brotli compression is enabled

### Medium priority

- Minified HTML - remove comments and whitespaces
- Use content Delivery Network
- Prefer using vector image rather than bitmap images
- Set width and height attribution on images (aspect ratio)
- Avoid using Base64 images
- Offscreen images are loaded lazily
- Ensure to serve images that are close to your display size
- Avoid multiple inline JavaScript snippets <script>
- Keep your dependencies up to date
- Check for performance problems in your JavaScript files
- Service workers for caching / performing heavy tasks
- Cooke size should be less than 4096 bytes
- Keep the cookie count less than 20

### Low priority

- Pre-load URLs where possible
- Concatenate CSS into a single file
- Remove unused CSS
- Use WOFF2 font format
- Use preconnect to load your font faster
- Keep the web font size under 300kb
- Prevent Flash or invisible Text
- Keep on eye on the size of dependencies

### Performance tools

- **[Page Speed Insights](https://pagespeed.web.dev)**
- **Lighthouse:** Lighthouse is an open-source tool developed by Google that is used to audit the performance, accessibility, and SEO of web pages. It is available as a browser extension and as a command-line tool, and it can be run on any web page to generate a report with recommendations for improvement.
- [Webpagetest.org](http://webpagetest.org/) is a website performance testing tool that allows users to test the load time and performance of web pages. It provides a wealth of information about the page load, including load time, Speed Index, and filmstrip view of the page load, as well as a breakdown of the page components and their load times.
- Chrome DevTools is a set of web development tools built into the Google Chrome browser. It allows developers to inspect and debug the front-end of web applications.
- Bundlephobia is a website and npm package that allows developers to search for the size of any JavaScript package before adding it to their project.
- Squoosh.app is a web app that allows you to compress images using a variety of codecs. It is built by Google Chrome team and is open source.

### More resources

*Framework guides*

**React**

- **[Optimizing Performance - React](https://reactjs.org/docs/optimizing-performance.html)**
- **[React image manipulation | Cloudinary](https://cloudinary.com/documentation/react_image_manipulation)**
- **[Debugging React performance with React 16 and Chrome Devtools.](https://building.calibreapp.com/debugging-react-performance-with-react-16-and-chrome-devtools-c90698a522ad)**
- **[Build Performant - React](https://web.dev/react/)**

[Recommended guides // talks](https://roadmap.sh/best-practices/frontend-performance)